The title of this series of four talks
is “Seek Peace and Pursue It,”
and it’s based on 1 Peter 3:11.
Let’s read that together
—1 Peter 3:11:
“Let him turn away from what is bad
and do what is good;
let him seek peace and pursue it.”
Yes, we have to pursue peace,
and pursuit requires effort.
Have you ever had to chase a piece
of paper that was in your hands
and got blown away by the wind,
and just once you get to it,
the wind blows it away again and again?
It can really take quite some effort
to retrieve and get that paper
back in your hands.
Just standing there and watching
the paper blow farther and farther away
is not going to get it back.
Well, peace can be a lot like that paper.
At some point, it can get blown away,
and we have to then chase,
or pursue, it to get that peace back again.
This series of talks will help us
to pursue peace in four ways:
by not quickly taking offense,
by apologizing,
by forgiving freely,
and by using our gift of speech wisely.
Let’s consider our first way to pursue peace:
Avoid quickly taking offense.
Now, because we are imperfect,
we might misjudge others
and quickly take offense.
Notice that we say quickly take offense.
That’s an important word.
We need to avoid jumping
to conclusions quickly
before we actually have the facts.
Even faithful men like Jesus’ apostles
have taken offense too quickly.
You may recall the time that Jesus
and his apostles
were looking for lodging
in a Samaritan village.
Now, the Samaritans in that village
rudely denied them lodging.
At Luke 9:54-56,
the apostles—James and John—
say to Jesus:
“Lord, do you want us to call fire down
from heaven and annihilate them?”
But Jesus rebukes them for their
rash and rather violent suggestion.
Think of the serious consequences
had Jesus yielded to the violent temper
of James and John.
The Samaritans could have become
prejudiced against the Kingdom message.
Instead, Jesus pursues a peaceful solution.
The account says
‘they simply went to a different village.’
Now, does this mean we’re saying
we can never take offense?
No, you may have a legitimate
“cause for complaint.”
The key point is that we should not
quickly draw conclusions
before we hear all the facts.
Proverbs 18:13 says:
“When anyone replies to a matter
before he hears the facts,
it is foolish and humiliating.”
In the following dramatization,
note what helps one sister
to overlook an offense.
And I expected more from you.
Haley, what are you talking about?
Gossiping about my posts!
Are you that lonely
that you’ve got nothing better to do?
Haley,
wait, please!
I don’t know what’s happening.
Did you talk to Emily about my posts?
Yes, we did . . .
So you gossiped about me.
No, I would . . .
I looked up to you!
I would never . . .
You’re supposed to be the mature one,
and you’re just like Emily,
busy running your mouth.
Haley!
Look, I can see you’re upset,
but trust me,
this is a huge misunderstanding.
I love you.
I would never ever say anything
behind your back.
So please calm down.
Sometimes I just feel so alone
—between Nana and work—
and then knowing all of you
are talking about me.
I promise, that’s not what happened.
You’re just really tired and overwhelmed.
So why don’t we
just slow things down a little.
You know, meetings
always make me feel better,
even on my worst days.
Why don’t we go inside,
clean up a little,
and enjoy the program together.
Then afterward, we can all talk.
I promise, it’ll be OK.
Haley really was upset.
She had already concluded that she
was being gossiped about by everyone.
If we find ourselves
like Haley feeling offended,
how can we avoid quickly taking offense?
Well, we must stop and think.
Let’s read Ecclesiastes 7:9
for some very good advice
in these situations
—Ecclesiastes 7:9:
“Do not be quick to take offense,
for the taking of offense lodges
in the bosom of fools.”
Like Celia said in the parking lot to Haley,
“Please calm down.”
So in those situations,
you need to think about what you know
and, just as important, what you don’t know.
Now, you know what you were told happened,
but what was really said?
In the video,
Haley quickly believed what she was told.
She did not even ask Celia
what she really said.
Or you may know what was said,
but do you know what was
really meant by it?
Haley asked,
“Did you talk about . . . my posts?”
And Celia said, “Yes.”
And immediately, Haley assumed the worst.
Or perhaps we misjudged
the person who hurt us.
Haley misjudged Celia
on the spot by saying,
‘You’re just as bad as Emily.’
She had not even heard from Celia yet.
Haley said to Celia
that she was the mature one,
the one she looked up to,
yet she was quick to believe
the worst about her.
Haley had not stopped
and really thought about what
she was thinking and saying.
Perhaps she was having a hard day.
Well, Celia really set a fine example for us.
Even though Haley spoke harshly to her,
Celia was calm and listened to Haley.
As Haley explained how
she was feeling lonely,
dealing and caring for her grandmother,
you can see the love and concern
that Celia had for Haley,
even though just moments before
she had spoken really harshly to her.
Well, besides taking time
to think things through,
we also need to remember
that it is Jehovah’s opinion of us
that matters the most.
Now, that’s an important point,
especially when we deal
with misunderstandings
or false accusations.
Think about it:
Jehovah is an eyewitness to everything.
To illustrate that, I want you to imagine
you had a traffic accident.
Now, you were just sitting at the stop sign,
but another car ran straight into you.
The police come,
and the person that ran into you
says that you ran into them,
and the police believe them.
You take the matter to court.
The judge listens as the other person
says that you ran into them;
however, before you can say anything,
the judge says:
“No, that is not what happened.
“I was there walking on the sidewalk
across the street that day,
and I saw the whole thing.”
Well, it’s extremely unlikely
that you can go to court and expect
the judge for your case
to have been an eyewitness.
This does illustrate, though,
the peace of mind that we can have
knowing that Jehovah is an eyewitness
to all that happens.
So when falsely accused
or when we have a misunderstanding
that we cannot seem to clear up,
it is of great comfort for us to know
that Jehovah was there that day
and saw the whole thing.
We don’t need to take offense
at every negative thing
that is said or done around us
or feel we have to defend ourselves
as being right on every occasion.
We would surely wear out emotionally
and probably not have very many friends.
We should be willing
to overlook minor transgressions.
Let’s look at Proverbs 19:11
—Proverbs 19:11.
What can help us?
“The insight of a man
certainly slows down his anger,
and it is beauty on his part
to overlook an offense.”
So can you “overlook an offense”?
As the proverb said,
that ‘is beauty on our part.’
If not and you have
a serious cause for complaint,
handle matters
according to Jehovah’s direction.
Show insight.
Slow down any anger.
Think carefully, and listen patiently
to make sure you clearly have all the facts
before you become offended
or take action.
Remember that piece of paper
that you had in your hands
and got blown away by the wind?
What if it was a hundred-dollar bill?
Well, you would make every effort
to pursue it and get it back
because it’s valuable.
Our peace with our brothers
is far more valuable than paper money.
When our peace
with our brothers or sisters
is blown away
by misunderstandings, mistakes, or sin,
then we should pursue peace
and try hard to get it back.
Yes, we glorify God and promote peace
when we avoid quickly taking offense.
Brother Ralph Walls,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will now present the next talk
of this symposium,
“‘Seek Peace and Pursue It’
. . . By Apologizing.”